There are many mechanisms to distribute time information and signals. Some of 
them use GNSS receivers to get timing from the Satellites (GPS, Glonass, 
Galileo) meanwhile others use wired protocols to provide the time reference 
through the network. In all these cases is important to note that it is not the 
same to distribute frequency than distributing phase information. The first 
problem is about sending the oscillator signal through a wire or provide a 
mechanism to regenerate the clock frequency and usually is called 
syntonization. On the other hand, the latter ensures that in all the elements 
of a network the events trigger exactly at the same instant and is known as 
synchronization. 

In the phase distribution scenario, the phase information is encoded on a pulse that is transmitted thought the wire periodically each second and use this as reference to know when a new second starts. This is typically called PPS (Pulse Per Second) signal. Finally, the last problem is the provision of the time that is not only ticking at the same time, having the same reference about when to start the counting but also having the same time in all the devices. This can be distributed by propagation of the time information from a central time server and then, by measuring the propagation time of this message, annotating it in each node. A network is synchronized when takes into consideration these three elements: frequency, phase (PPS) and time.

This contribution is focused on finding a solution to provide very accurate PPS 
signal distribution for the Square Kilometer Array (SKA) Telescope 
\cite{ska:project_website}. It is an international project to build a radio 
telescope tens of times more sensitive and hundreds of times faster at mapping 
the sky than today’s best radio astronomy facilities. It will become the 
world’s largest radio telescope. But the SKA is not a single telescope, but a 
collection of various types of antennas to be spread over long distances. Once 
completed, it will generate data at a rate more than 10 times today’s global 
Internet traffic. The SKA will be used to answer fundamental questions of 
science and about the laws of nature and imposes a technological challenge 
never faced before. 

This article presents a new device based on the technology called White-Rabbit 
\cite{ohwr:wr_wiki} to be used as mechanism for very accurate PPS signal 
distribution. This paper is organized in several sections. The current one 
presents the introduction and the motivation. Section 2 introduces the SKA 
Telescope project, the different network and the timing requirements that 
explain why an industrial technology solution is not feasible for SKA. Section 
3 focuses on the fundamentals of the White-Rabbit technology. Section 4 
describes the proposed node as end-node for SKA Telescope including the 
justification, architecture and software support. The synchronization 
performance of the proposed solution is evaluated in different scenarios with 
special consideration on the scalability of the WR technology for the SKA 
deployment and the synchronization accuracy taking into account different 
meteorological conditions. Final remarks and conclusions are described on the 
section 6. The last sections are dedicated to the future work and the 
acknowledgments.